(docs) Authorization guide (#1326)
modelcontextprotocol/modelcontextprotocol: docs/docs/tutorials/security/authorization.mdx

## When Should You Use Authorization?

While authorization for MCP servers is **optional**, it is strongly recommended when:

- Your server accesses user-specific data (emails, documents, databases)
- You need to audit who performed which actions
- Your server grants access to its APIs that require user consent
- You're building for enterprise environments with strict access controls
- You want to implement rate limiting or usage tracking per user

<Tip>
**Authorization for Local MCP Servers**

For MCP servers using the [STDIO transport](/specification/2025-06-18/basic/transports#stdio), you can use environment-based credentials or credentials provided by third-party libraries embedded directly in the MCP server instead. Because a STDIO-built MCP server runs locally, it has access to a range of flexible options when it comes to acquiring user credentials that may or may not rely on in-browser authentication and authorization flows.

> OAuth flows, in turn, are designed for HTTP-based transports where the MCP server is remotely-hosted and the client needs to authorize a user to access said remote server.

Author: @pcarleton do we want to encourage local usage of HTTP servers, though? Feels like a potentially dangerous path.

 and retrieve another set of metadata properties that will allow it to know the endpoints it needs to complete the authorization flow.

```json
{
  "issuer": "https://auth.your-server.com",
  "authorization_endpoint": "https://auth.your-server.com/authorize",
  "token_endpoint": "https://auth.your-server.com/token",
  "registration_endpoint": "https://auth.your-server.com/register"
}
```

</Step>

<Step title="Client Registration">
With all the key metadata out of the way, the client now needs to make sure that it's registered with the authorization server. This can be done in two ways.

First, the client can be **pre-registered** with a given authorization server, in which case it can have embedded client registration information that it uses to complete the authorization flow. Alternatively, the client can use **Dynamic Client Registration** (DCR) to dynamically register itself with the authorization server. The latter scenario requires the authorization server to support DCR.

> If the authorization server does support, the client will send a request to the `registration_endpoint` with its information:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the authorization server does support DCR, the client will send a request to the `registration_endpoint` with its information:
```

```json
{
  "client_name": "My MCP Client",
  "redirect_uris": ["http://localhost:3000/callback"],
  "grant_types": ["authorization_code", "refresh_token"],
  "response_types": ["code"]
}
```

> If the registration succeeds, the authorization server will return a JSON blob with client registration information, including the original registration metadata as well as `client_id`, `client_secret` (if applicable), `client_id_issued_at` (optional), and `client_secret_expires_at` (if `client_secret` is used).

Reviewer: Is it worth talking about the `token_endpoint_auth_method` param and how it influences this? As is it is unclear why an auth server will or won't issue a secret.

<Tip>
**No DCR or Pre-Registration**

In case a MCP client connects to a MCP server that doesn't use an authorization server that supports DCR and the client is not pre-registered with said authorization server, it's the responsibility of the client developer to provide an affordance for the end-user to enter client information manually.
</Tip>

</Step>

> <Step title="User Authorization">

Reviewer: This step combines the `/authorize` endpoint, the OAuth auth code callback handling, and the `/token` endpoint. If the audience isn't familiar with OAuth, this could be broken out into a few more steps.

Author: Good point, I can fix this.

> The client will now need to open a browser to the `/authorize` endpoint, where the user can log in and grant the required permissions. The authorization server will redirect back to the client with an authorization code that the client exchanges for tokens:

Reviewer 2: Are we considering only front-channel authorization? A client implementation might also use back-channel flows such as Device Code or CIBA.

</Warning>

### MCP Server Setup

We will now set up our MCP server to use the locally-running Keycloak authorization server. Depending on your programming language preference, you can use one of the supported [MCP SDKs](/docs/sdk).

For our testing purposes, we will create an extremely simple MCP server that exposes two tools - one for addition and another for multiplication. The server will require authorization to access these.

<Tabs>
<Tab title='TypeScript'>

You can see the complete TypeScript project in the [sample repository](https://github.com/localden/min-ts-mcp-auth).

Prior to running the code below, ensure that you have a `.env` file with the following content:

```env
# Server host/port
HOST=localhost
PORT=3000

# Auth server location
AUTH_HOST=localhost
AUTH_PORT=8080
AUTH_REALM=master

# Keycloak OAuth client credentials
OAUTH_CLIENT_ID=<YOUR_SERVER_CLIENT_ID>
OAUTH_CLIENT_SECRET=<YOUR_SERVER_CLIENT_SECRET>
```

`OAUTH_CLIENT_ID` and `OAUTH_CLIENT_SECRET` are associated with the MCP server client we created earlier.

> In addition to implementing the MCP authorization specification, the server below also does token introspection via Keycloak to make sure that the token it receives from the client is valid. It also implements basic logging to allow you to easily diagnose any issues.

Author: Good call-out. I will mention that introspection is _one of the ways_ but if the AS does not offer it, there are ways to do that locally.

    port: Number(process.env.AUTH_PORT) || 8080,
    realm: process.env.AUTH_REALM || "master",
    clientId: process.env.OAUTH_CLIENT_ID || "mcp-server",
    clientSecret: process.env.OAUTH_CLIENT_SECRET || "",
  },
};

function createOAuthUrls() {
  const authBaseUrl = new URL(`http://${CONFIG.auth.host}:${CONFIG.auth.port}/realms/${CONFIG.auth.realm}/`);
  return {
    issuer: authBaseUrl.toString(),
    introspection_endpoint: new URL("protocol/openid-connect/token/introspect", authBaseUrl).toString(),
    authorization_endpoint: new URL("protocol/openid-connect/auth", authBaseUrl).toString(),
    token_endpoint: new URL("protocol/openid-connect/token", authBaseUrl).toString(),
  };
}

function createRequestLogger() {
  return (req: any, res: any, next: any) => {
    const start = Date.now();
    res.on('finish', () => {
      const ms = Date.now() - start;
      console.log(`${req.method} ${req.originalUrl} -> ${res.statusCode} ${ms}ms`);
    });
    next();
  };
}

const app = express();

app.use(express.json({
  verify: (req: any, _res, buf) => {
    req.rawBody = buf?.toString() ?? '';
  }
}));

app.use(cors({

>   origin: '*',

Reviewer 3: It may be worth pointing to the [spec](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-06-18/basic/transports#security-warning) security warning somewhere to clarify why we use CORS here, and e.g. add a comment that this is not production-ready. See also my [test](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/csharp-sdk/discussions/687#discussioncomment-14044988 ) using the c# sdk.

For development and guide-purposes, I think using a localhost-uri is a better default than `*`, wdyt?

  exposedHeaders: ['Mcp-Session-Id'],
}));

app.use(createRequestLogger());

const mcpServerUrl = new URL(`http://${CONFIG.host}:${CONFIG.port}`);
const oauthUrls = createOAuthUrls();

const oauthMetadata: OAuthMetadata = {
  ...oauthUrls,
  response_types_supported: ["code"],
};

const tokenVerifier = {
  verifyAccessToken: async (token: string) => {
    const endpoint = oauthMetadata.introspection_endpoint;

    if (!endpoint) {
      console.error('[auth] no introspection endpoint in metadata');
      throw new Error('No token verification endpoint available in metadata');
    }

>     const params = new URLSearchParams({

Author: Eeehhhh I am on the fence about this. As I mentioned in the doc, I am all for not reinventing the wheel here, but I wonder if for _simple enough things_ like this a library-less approach is better. Open to your thoughts here @max-stytch

      throw new Error(`None of the provided audiences are allowed. Expected ${mcpServerUrl}, got: ${audiences.join(', ')}`);
    }

    return {
      token,
      clientId: data.client_id,
      scopes: data.scope ? data.scope.split(' ') : [],
      expiresAt: data.exp,
    };
  }
};
app.use(mcpAuthMetadataRouter({
  oauthMetadata,
  resourceServerUrl: mcpServerUrl,
  scopesSupported: ['mcp:tools'],
  resourceName: 'MCP Demo Server',
}));

const authMiddleware = requireBearerAuth({
  verifier: tokenVerifier,
  requiredScopes: [],
  resourceMetadataUrl: getOAuthProtectedResourceMetadataUrl(mcpServerUrl),
});

const transports: { [sessionId: string]: StreamableHTTPServerTransport } = {};

function createMcpServer() {
  const server = new McpServer({
    name: "example-server",
    version: "1.0.0"
  });

  server.registerTool("add",
    {
      title: "Addition Tool",
      description: "Add two numbers together",
      inputSchema: { 
        a: z.number().describe("First number to add"), 
        b: z.number().describe("Second number to add") 
      }
    },
    async ({ a, b }) => ({
      content: [{ type: "text", text: `${a} + ${b} = ${a + b}` }]
    })
  );

>   server.registerTool("multiply",

Reviewer: A tool that shows using the caller's identity within the tool handler could work very well here. Even a simple `whoami` that echos the `sub` and the `scope`

Reviewer: Without authorization context in the tool, or the ability to use the caller's information, we're not doing a good job of showing why OAuth is better than API Keys. Since we're using the `requireBearerAuth` helper, the auth info should be passed in to the tool automatically. Based off of [this test](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/typescript-sdk/blob/abb2f0aa14f94f61be2e1f72711aa35284068f5b/src/server/streamableHttp.test.ts#L106-L113) we could do something like: 
```typescript
server.registerTool("whoami", {
    title: "Who Am I",
    description: "Retrieve authentication information about the current caller",
  },
  async ({}, { authInfo }, => ({
    content: [{ type: "text", text: `You are:\n${JSON.stringify(authInfo, null, 2)}` }]
  })
);
```

which could at least serve as a pointer to a separate future tutorial where we go further in depth on scope management

    {
      title: "Multiplication Tool", 
      description: "Multiply two numbers together",
      inputSchema: {
        x: z.number().describe("First number to multiply"),
        y: z.number().describe("Second number to multiply")
      }
    },
    async ({ x, y }) => ({
      content: [{ type: "text", text: `${x} × ${y} = ${x * y}` }]
    })
  );

  return server;
}

const mcpPostHandler = async (req: express.Request, res: express.Response) => {
  const sessionId = req.headers['mcp-session-id'] as string | undefined;
  let transport: StreamableHTTPServerTransport;

  if (sessionId && transports[sessionId]) {

>     transport = transports[sessionId];

Reviewer: What do you think about making this into a stateless MCP server? If we [close the transport](https://github.com/max-stytch/stytch-node-mcp-example/blob/main/mcp/server.js#L89-L93) when the request closes, we don't need to manage transports in memory, or deal with sessions at all. We can leave stateful transports up to another guide.  

```typescript
  // Look Ma, No State!
  try {
    const server = getServer(req);
    const transport = new StreamableHTTPServerTransport({
      sessionIdGenerator: undefined,
    });
    res.on('close', () => {
      console.log('Request closed');
      transport.close();
      server.close();
    });
    await server.connect(transport);
    await transport.handleRequest(req, res, req.body);
  } catch (error) {
    console.error('Error handling MCP request:', error);
    if (!res.headersSent) {
      res.status(500).json({
        jsonrpc: '2.0',
        error: {
          code: -32603,
          message: 'Internal server error',
        },
        id: null,
      });
    }
  }
  ```

      sessionIdGenerator: () => randomUUID(),
      onsessioninitialized: (sessionId) => {
        transports[sessionId] = transport;
      },
    });

    transport.onclose = () => {
      if (transport.sessionId) {
        delete transports[transport.sessionId];
      }
    };

    const server = createMcpServer();
    await server.connect(transport);
  } else {
    res.status(400).json({
      jsonrpc: '2.0',
      error: {
        code: -32000,
        message: 'Bad Request: No valid session ID provided',
      },
      id: null,
    });
    return;
  }

  await transport.handleRequest(req, res, req.body);
};

const handleSessionRequest = async (req: express.Request, res: express.Response) => {
  const sessionId = req.headers['mcp-session-id'] as string | undefined;
  if (!sessionId || !transports[sessionId]) {
    res.status(400).send('Invalid or missing session ID');
    return;
  }
  
  const transport = transports[sessionId];
  await transport.handleRequest(req, res);
};

app.post('/', authMiddleware, mcpPostHandler);
app.get('/', authMiddleware, handleSessionRequest);
app.delete('/', authMiddleware, handleSessionRequest);

> app.listen(CONFIG.port, () => {

Reviewer 3: as with my origin-comment, we have a minor thing here. the spec states: 
> When implementing Streamable HTTP transport:
1. Servers MUST validate the Origin header on all incoming connections to prevent DNS rebinding attacks
2. When running locally, servers SHOULD bind only to localhost (127.0.0.1) rather than all network interfaces (0.0.0.0)
3. Servers SHOULD implement proper authentication for all connections

Now calling app.listen without a host effectively binds to 0.0.0.0 and should as such not be used in (security relevant) guides imo. WDYT? 

I know it should be a prescriptive "starter" guide, but these small cracks might get copy/pasted everywhere (coming from the OIDC/OAuth world, this happened and happens till today), so I think it'd be better to give people good material from the start.

- **Separate app vs. resource server credentials**. Don't reuse your MCP server's client secret for end‑user flows. Store all secrets in a proper secret manager, not in source control.
- **Return proper challenges**. On 401, include `WWW-Authenticate` with `Bearer`, `realm`, and `resource_metadata` so clients can discover how to authenticate.
- **DCR (Dynamic Client Registration) controls**. If enabled, be aware of constraints specific to your organization, such as trusted hosts, required vetting, and audited registrations. Unauthenticated DCR means that anyone can register any client with your authorization server.
- **Multi‑tenant/realm mix-ups**. Pin to a single issuer/tenant unless explicitly multi‑tenant. Reject tokens from other realms even if signed by the same authorization server.
- **Audience/resource indicator misuse**. Don't configure or accept generic audiences (like `api`) or unrelated resources. Require the audience/resource to match your configured server.
- **Error detail leakage**. Return generic messages to clients, but log detailed reasons with correlation IDs internally to aid troubleshooting without exposing internals.

> - **Session identifier hardening**. Treat `Mcp-Session-Id` as untrusted input; never tie authorization to it. Regenerate on auth changes and validate lifecycle server‑side.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- **Session identifier hardening**. Treat `Mcp-Session-Id` as untrusted input; never tie authorization to it. The csharp-sdk will reject requests with a 403 response if it appears to come from a user ID that's different from the user that first received the `Mcp-Session-Id`. Clients should start a new session if authenticating with a new user.
```

We have checks [here for Streamable HTTP](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/csharp-sdk/blob/main/src/ModelContextProtocol.AspNetCore/StreamableHttpHandler.cs#L142-L148) and [here for SSE](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/csharp-sdk/blob/15f8e89ac3aedb2bb4fa9232f6093f092b2ce956/src/ModelContextProtocol.AspNetCore/SseHandler.cs#L94-L98) for reference.

```

Decoded, it will look like this:

```json
{
  "alg": "RS256",
  "typ": "JWT",
  "kid": "5N710l5YnLZMwXfuVRJXkBKvY36sorgDnlrirgkeLys"
}.{
  "exp": 1755540817,
  "iat": 1755540757,
  "auth_time": 1755538888,
  "jti": "onrtac:b34080ff-8404-6867-81be-1231b50593a8",
  "iss": "http://localhost:8080/realms/master",
  "aud": "http://localhost:3000",
  "sub": "33ed6c6b-c6e0-4928-a161-f2f69c7a03b9",
  "typ": "Bearer",
  "azp": "7975a5b6-8b59-4a85-9cba-8faebdab8974",
  "sid": "8f7ec276-358f-4ccc-b313-db08290f376f",
  "scope": "mcp:tools"
}.[Signature]

> ```

Reviewer 5: I was really just concerned about the rendering. You can use ```jwt instead of ```json and it will render fine, without any error highlights.

```jwt
{
  "alg": "RS256",
  "typ": "JWT",
  "kid": "5N710l5YnLZMwXfuVRJXkBKvY36sorgDnlrirgkeLys"
}.{
  "exp": 1755540817,
  "iat": 1755540757,
  "auth_time": 1755538888,
  "jti": "onrtac:b34080ff-8404-6867-81be-1231b50593a8",
  "iss": "http://localhost:8080/realms/master",
  "aud": "http://localhost:3000",
  "sub": "33ed6c6b-c6e0-4928-a161-f2f69c7a03b9",
  "typ": "Bearer",
  "azp": "7975a5b6-8b59-4a85-9cba-8faebdab8974",
  "sid": "8f7ec276-358f-4ccc-b313-db08290f376f",
  "scope": "mcp:tools"
}.[Signature]
```

<Warning>
**Embedded Audience**

> Notice the `aud` claim embedded in the token - it's currently set to be the URI of the test MCP server and its inferred from the scope that we've previously configured. This will be important in our implementation to validate.

Reviewer 6: (small) suggest changing "its inferred" to "it's inferred"

```json
"my-mcp-server-18676652": {
  "url": "http://localhost:3000",
  "type": "http"
}
```

On connection, you will be taken to the browser, where you will be prompted to consent to Visual Studio Code having access to the `mcp:tools` scope.

<Frame>
  <img
    src="/images/tutorial-authorization/keycloak-vscode.png"
    alt="Keycloak consent form for VS Code."
  />
</Frame>

After consenting, you will see the tools listed right above the server entry in `mcp.json`.

<Frame>
  <img
    src="/images/tutorial-authorization/tools-vs-code.png"
    alt="Tools listed in VS Code."
  />
</Frame>

You will be able to invoke individual tools with the help of the `#` sign in the chat view.

<Frame>
  <img
    src="/images/tutorial-authorization/tools-vs-code-invoke.png"
    alt="Invoking MCP tools in VS Code."
  />
</Frame>

## Common Pitfalls and How to Avoid Them

For comprehensive security guidance, including attack vectors, mitigation strategies, and implementation best practices, make sure to read through [Security Best Practices](/specification/draft/basic/security_best_practices). A few key issues are called out below.

> - **Do not implement token valdiation or authorization logic by yourself**. Use off-the-shelf, well-tested, and secure libraries for things like token validation or authorization decisions. Doing everything from scratch means that you're more likely to implement things incorrectly unless you are a security expert.

Reviewer 6: (small) typo in "valdiation " -> "validation"
